Greetings, brothers and sisters!
Today’s session will begin
with a music-video presentation
that reminds us
of our privilege and responsibility
to help others develop faith.
Please enjoy the presentation!
Welcome back to our “Powerful by Faith!”
Regional Convention.
During this session and the next one,
you will hear the talks listed
under the “Saturday” heading
of your printed program.
The Scripture theme for today’s program
is taken from Jude 3, where we are told
to “put up a hard fight for the faith.”
We’ll see how we can demonstrate our faith
regardless of our circumstances,
and we’ll see how we can help others
to build faith.
Now let’s share in singing
song number 57, entitled
“Preaching to All Sorts of People.”
Again, that’s song number 57.
In your ministry, do you meet some
who seem unlikely to respond favorably?
Are you prepared to help them?
As we will see in our first symposium
of this session,
our attitude toward others
can affect how we give a witness
and how people might respond.
Each speaker will introduce
the one to follow.
Please give your attention
to Brother Ronald Curzan,
a helper to the Teaching Committee.
He will begin with the theme
“Remember—Faithless People
Can Acquire Faith!—The Ninevites.”
‘Impossible!
It will never happen—not in a million years!’
Have you ever thought that way
about someone coming into the truth?
Well, that might be
our limited view of a person.
But how does Jehovah view him or her?
And what is his view of all humans,
even faithless ones?
Notice his limitless view
at 1 Timothy 2:4.
There it says: “. . . God, whose will is
that all sorts of people should be saved
and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.”
So, what is Jehovah’s desire?
It’s his will that all hear the message
and be allowed to make changes and be saved.
Now, to us that might be impossible,
but we know
“with God all things are possible.”
He can stir the heart,
and he can motivate anyone.
While it’s true that “faith
is not [the] possession of all people,”
it is a possession
of millions around the world,
and it can be for those
who choose to acquire it.
We know that the Bible
contains many examples
of men and women
who at one time lacked faith
but later acquired it,
and the same is true today.
It’s not impossible.
This symposium will help us
to remember this fact:
Faithless people can acquire faith
if we have Jehovah’s view of them
and allow all sorts of people
to hear God’s Word and make adjustments.
We will discuss four groups
of people in this symposium:
the Ninevites, Jesus’ fleshly brothers,
prominent ones, and nonreligious people.
And in each one of these symposium talks,
we will consider
what helped former unbelievers
to acquire faith
and what we can learn from that.
First, let’s consider
the example of the Ninevites.
As you recall, they were Assyrians
who lived in the capital city of Nineveh,
and it was founded by Nimrod.
It was referred to
as “the city of bloodshed.”
With that history and backdrop,
we can imagine what the people were like.
They worshipped gods of war.
War was their religion.
Yes, they were aggressive.
They were violent people,
and they took pleasure
in sadistically torturing their captives.
Well, their reputation was known
by all the surrounding nations,
including God’s people.
So that’s why Jehovah sent his prophet Jonah
to go there and proclaim their destruction.
As we notice this first video,
imagine how Jonah must have felt
going into Nineveh
—going through the streets
and observing the people of Nineveh
contemplating his warning message.
How did Jonah view his assignment?
Well, at this time,
he did not have Jehovah’s view.
He was afraid of the Ninevites
—maybe what they thought of him
or what they would do
once they heard his message.
Well, Jonah was human.
He had feelings like ours.
A human tendency is to judge people
on what we see or what we hear about them.
If you were alive then
and Jehovah gave you
this assignment instead of Jonah,
how might you have reacted?
Would you have thought about the Ninevites
and their cruelty
and their wickedness and say,
“They can change”?
Or would you feel: ‘It’s impossible!
It will never happen—not in a million years’?
Well, that’s how Jonah felt.
But Jehovah corrected
his view of his assignment
as well as his view of the people.
And he took that message
and that counsel from Jehovah to heart,
and he proclaimed the message
to the people of Nineveh.
He certainly got the Ninevites’ attention,
but he might have thought to himself,
‘Well, this is the end for me.’
But how did they respond?
Notice Jonah 3:5;
it says:
“And the men of Nineveh put faith in God.”
So this surprised even Jonah himself.
The king made a proclamation
to all the people
of what they should do
to demonstrate their faith.
Notice verse 8; it says:
“Let them be covered with sackcloth,
both man and beast;
“and let them call out earnestly to God
“and turn from their evil ways
and from the violence they practice.
“Who knows
whether the true God may reconsider
“what he intends to do
and turn from his burning anger,
so that we may not perish?”
What helped the Ninevites
to change, to acquire faith?
It was a direct result
of Jonah accomplishing his assignment
—boldly preaching God’s message.
They were given the opportunity to change,
and to Jonah’s surprise, they did.
But Jonah had to make changes too.
He had to take his limited view
of his assignment and the people
and change it to the limitless view
that Jehovah had
—that people can change,
and Jehovah can stir their hearts.
And Jonah had to look at himself
and relook at his assignment.
He was not the judge.
He was not the jury.
He was a messenger.
Having Jehovah’s view changes everything
—how we view others, how we view ourselves,
how we view our assignments today.
We are ministers who have a message.
We’re not the judges.
Well, Jehovah is the Judge.
And how did he judge
the Ninevites worthy
of being saved and having his mercy?
Notice Jonah 3:10;
it says:
“When the true God saw what they did,
“how they had turned back
from their evil ways,
“he reconsidered the calamity
that he said he would bring on them,
and he did not bring it.”
In the following video,
notice the changes that the Ninevites
made and how they benefited.
Are you Jonah?
I am.
Thank you.
Well, the Ninevites certainly changed
from the first video that we watched.
Changes that they made on the inside
allowed them to make changes on the outside
—how they viewed their fellow Ninevites,
and how they treated them.
Even their dispositions changed from gloomy,
unhappy faces to smiling, happy ones.
They were appreciative
of Jonah’s warning message
as well as Jehovah’s mercy.
What’s the lesson for us?
The same lesson that Jonah learned:
We need to show compassion as Jehovah does.
This means more than just noticing
that someone needs help but taking the time
and having the desire
to try to relieve that pain.
Help them.
How can we imitate
Jehovah’s compassion today?
It’s by putting compassion into action.
And we do by our preaching.
And we do this for all  persons
—giving them an opportunity
to change and not being judgmental—
by viewing them as potential sheep
and as our future brother or sister.
Like the Ninevites, many today
are taught wrong beliefs
and attitudes from childhood.
And it may be difficult
to change but not impossible.
What can help them change?
Hebrews 4:12 says
“the word of God” can help.
“The word of God is alive and exerts power.”
Many of us are living proof
of the Bible’s power to change us.
Before learning the truth,
some of us might have been
violent, immoral, faithless.
But as the apostle Paul said:
“That is what some of you were.”
They changed back then.
People are changing today.
With the help of God’s Word
and his holy spirit,
we can help others change.
We cannot read hearts,
but we know that Jehovah can,
and he can stir the heart
and motivate anyone.
What can we do in the meantime?
We can remember to follow
what Romans 10:16 says.
Our assignment is to be a messenger.
Notice verse 16:
“Nevertheless, they did not
all obey the good news.
“For Isaiah says: ‘Jehovah, who has put faith
in the thing heard from us?’
“So faith follows the thing heard.
In turn, what is heard
is through the word about Christ.”
“Faith follows the thing heard.”
What motivated the Ninevites to change?
It was only after they heard
Jonah’s warning message.
It is our hope and prayer
that many will put faith in God
because of the warning message that we give.
So may we be like Jonah.
Be compassionate but bold
in preaching the good news to all.
And who knows?
‘Faith may follow the things heard.’
Remember, it is possible.
Faithless people can acquire faith.
Brother Mark Sanderson,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now consider
the next part of this symposium,
“Remember—Faithless People
Can Acquire Faith!
—Jesus’ Fleshly Brothers.”
Do you have relatives
who are presently not serving Jehovah?
I think most of us do.
And we’re not alone.
Even our Lord Jesus
had that same circumstance.
Even though his half brothers knew
about the miracles he was performing,
the Bible says that they were not
expressing faith in Jesus as the Messiah.
Well, it was so bad
—can you imagine?—
that when Jesus was being put to death,
it appears that his brothers were not there.
Do you remember the account
when Jesus was on the torture stake
and he looked down at the disciple
and asked him basically
to become responsible for His mother?
They weren’t there to support Him.
But what happened just a short while
after Jesus had been resurrected?
Well, it was amazing
because some of those
half brothers were found,
along with Jesus’ mother,
with the disciples fervently praying.
Can you imagine how Jesus must have felt?
Can you imagine the joy
he must have experienced
to see them now beginning to express faith?
Well, maybe you’ve had that experience too.
Maybe one of your relatives
—maybe your mate,
one of your children, one of your siblings—
has now come to serve Jehovah.
How wonderful!
What a joyful feeling!
Really, nothing could compare to it.
Well, what was it
that helped Jesus’ half brothers
to go from being faithless
to putting faith in him?
And what can you
and I learn from that example?
Well, let’s address that question.
What was it that helped
Jesus’ brothers to acquire faith?
Well, here’s the number one thing:
Jesus was patient with his relatives.
Now, that’s an important point,
because look at how Jesus
was treated by his relatives.
Would you look with me at Mark 3:21?
It says there:
“But when his relatives heard about it,
“they went out to seize him,
for they were saying:
‘He has gone out of his mind.’”
Jesus did not take offense
—even though his relatives
were trying to seize him
and even though they said he had gone crazy.
Have your relatives perhaps
said some things like that to you?
Jesus did not take offense.
He was patient.
Well, in fact, after his resurrection,
look at what Jesus did.
Let’s go to 1 Corinthians chapter 15,
and let’s read together verse 7.
It says: “After that he appeared to James,
then to all the apostles.”
Now, this is just a very small detail,
but did you notice what it said?
It said: “[Jesus] appeared to James.”
Well, now, we don’t know what Jesus
said to James when He appeared to him.
But the point is
that Jesus made a special effort
to appear to His half brother James.
Well, James must have deeply appreciated
that special attention from Jesus.
And why do we say that?
Well, James went on to become
a respected elder
in the congregation in Jerusalem.
In fact, you may remember
that in Acts chapter 15,
when the apostles and older men
gathered in Jerusalem
to consider the matter about circumcision,
it seems that James was the one
who was presiding at that meeting.
Well, what had happened?
James had gone from being a faithless person
to now being a pillar in the congregation.
James and His other half brother Jude
both had the privilege of writing letters
that were included
in the Christian Greek Scriptures.
Well, now, in the following video,
please take careful note
of what helped a family member
to be a person with faith.
The truth came to our home
through my mother.
I was never seriously interested
in the truth.
Where we grew up,
education was very important.
A person needed to make money
and live a lavish life.
So that’s the life I chose
—to study, to get higher education—
so that I could have what others had.
Although they could see
that I wasn’t interested in the truth,
my mother and brother did not give up on me.
When I came back from school in January,
my mother ordered the Examining
the Scriptures Daily  booklet for me.
Year after year, I always had
the Examining the Scriptures Daily  booklet
and a Bible.
She made sure
that although I wasn’t attending meetings,
at least I had literature.
Besides that, my younger brother,
the one I was close to,
decided to take the truth seriously.
When I came back from school,
I saw my brother
getting a Bible study of his own,
and I was surprised to see him
studying the Bible
and noticed that he had prepared.
He cared about
and loved what he was learning.
That’s when I understood
that the Bible changes lives.
A scripture that comes to mind
is Hosea 11:4.
There it shows that Jehovah
pulls us with “cords of love” and “kindness.”
In my situation, Jehovah did this.
So I made the decision to be regular
at the congregation meetings,
and I finally started studying
the Bible with someone in 2007
and got baptized in 2008.
My family really encouraged me;
they never gave up on me.
And I encourage parents
not to give up on their children.
They must continue encouraging them
and have the hope
that Jehovah God
will draw them to the organization
because they have good hearts.
Well, brothers and sisters, we want
that same experience for our relatives.
What can we do to help them to grow in faith?
Well, let’s talk briefly about three things.
Here’s the first one:
Be patient with your relatives.
We want to imitate the example
of our wonderful God, Jehovah.
Do you remember when the nation of Israel
went astray so many times?
Well, in Jeremiah chapter 44,
the Bible says that Jehovah sent his prophets
“again and again.”
He was very patient with his people.
We want to be patient with our relatives too.
Don’t give up on them.
And then second, we want to be tactful.
We want to look for ways that we
can stimulate their interest in the truth.
Yeah, it’s true, Jesus described
the message of the truth
like “water” that could
lead to “everlasting life.”
But have you ever tried
to drink from a fire hydrant?
That’s a very difficult thing to do.
We don’t want our relatives to choke
because we’re forcing too much information
with too much force, or power.
Instead,
we want our relatives
to feel refreshed by the truth.
Well, whether our relatives
feel choked or refreshed
will really depend on how we
go about explaining the truth to them.
So be tactful and speak
to them in a loving way
that will stimulate their interest.
Let’s go to that third point:
We want to show empathy
to our relatives
and let our conduct speak for us.
You know, when we first learn the truth,
our relatives may not be sure of how this
is now going to affect
our relationship with them.
Instead of thinking of many,
many different things that we could say,
it’s important to remember that what we do
is going to speak far more loudly
than the things that we say.
You know, there is a saying that says:
“I’d rather see a sermon than hear one.”
Isn’t that true?
One sister named Pauline realized
that instead of talking to her husband
so much about the truth,
she needed to set a good example.
Well, when her husband
observed the good effect
that the Bible was having on his wife
and on his children,
that was the thing that opened
his mind and opened his heart
to the message of the good news.
You just don’t know, brothers and sisters,
the good effect of your conduct,
of your example, on your relatives.
You know, about two years ago,
I was out in California
at a regional convention
and a sister came up to me with two brothers.
Now, she had been raised
by her faithful mother in the truth,
but she had gone away
from the truth for more than 30 years.
She watched a broadcast,
and she was moved to return.
She then reached out to her brother
who was also away from the truth
for more than 30 years.
He decided to come back too.
And then the two of them
reached out to their other brother
who was also away for more than 30 years,
and he also came back.
Here the three of them were in front of me.
Well, the sister said:
“I think my mother is going to have
to be resurrected twice.
“We were all out of the truth when she died.
“When she sees us in the new world,
she’ll be so shocked that I’m sure
she’ll need to be resurrected again.”
What’s the point?
The good example
of their mother stayed with them
even long after their mother had passed away.
Brothers and sisters,
Jehovah can use you to help your relatives.
They might be faithless right now,
but with your help,
they can become full of faith.
It worked in the case of Jesus,
and it can work for you too.
Now Brother Ralph Walls,
a helper to the Personnel Committee,
will consider the next talk
of this symposium,
“Remember—Faithless People
Can Acquire Faith!
—Prominent Ones.”
Some years ago, a brother in Mexico
from the rurals,
dressed in very simple country garb,
knocked at the door of a palatial mansion.
A man in a silken bathrobe responded
and asked what he wanted.
The Witness said,
“If a mule should come to your door
with two bags of gold,
would you accept it?”
Annoyed, the householder replied:
“I do not understand what you’re telling me.
I am a famous engineer.”
The Witness then asked him,
“What do you understand about prophecies?”
The man admitted that he did not know
anything about them.
Then the Witness said:
“That is what I want to speak to you about.
“I am that mule that came to your door,
“and the two bags of gold
are these magazines:
The Watchtower  and Awake!”
The man was impressed by the presentation
of this humble Witness
and took the two magazines.
Did that man come into the truth?
We don’t know.
But what we do know
is that our humble brother
gave that man an opportunity
for Jehovah to stir his heart.
In the first century, many prominent Jews
hesitated to follow Jesus
because they feared becoming outcasts.
The account in the Gospel
of John chapter 12 says:
“Many even of the rulers
“actually put faith in him,
“but they would not acknowledge him
because of the Pharisees,
“so that they would not be expelled
from the synagogue.”
However, some overcame social pressure
and took a stand for Jesus.
The Bible tells us of “Joseph of Arimathea,
“a reputable member of the Council,
“who . . . took courage
and went in before Pilate
and asked for the body of Jesus.”
And the book of Acts reports
that “the word of God
continued to spread, . . .
and a large crowd of priests
began to be obedient to the faith.”
An outstanding example of a prominent one
is Saul of Tarsus,
who later became the apostle Paul.
He was a Pharisee
and one who persecuted Jewish Christians.
He admitted this, saying:
“I persecuted this Way to the point of death,
binding and handing over to prisons
both men and women.”
But he changed and became
a zealous preacher
and an apostle.
Similarly today, some who had
a high social position in this world
have become believers.
What helped Saul acquire faith?
Let’s let Paul tell us.
Please turn to Acts chapter 22,
and we’ll read verses 6 through 8.
At Acts 22:6-8,
he says:
“But as I was traveling
“and getting near to Damascus,
about midday,
“suddenly out of heaven a great light
“flashed all around me,
“and I fell to the ground
and heard a voice say to me:
“‘Saul, Saul,
“why are you persecuting me?’
“I answered: ‘Who are you, Lord?’
“And he said to me: ‘I am Jesus the Nazarene,
whom you are persecuting.’”
Yes, it was by Jesus
miraculously appearing to Saul
and identifying himself.
A shocking event!
As a result, Saul completely changed
his values and priorities in life.
Later, he was inspired to write something
that reflects
an entirely different viewpoint.
Let’s read it.
It’s in the book of Philippians chapter 3,
and notice what he says in verses 7 and 8:
“Yet, the things that were gains to me,
“I have considered loss
on account of the Christ.
“What is more, I do indeed also consider
all things to be loss
“on account of the excelling value
“of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.
“For his sake I have taken
the loss of all things
“and I consider them as a lot of refuse,
that I may gain Christ.”
What was it that moved Paul
to have such a change?
Jehovah used a startling occasion
to stir Paul’s heart.
World events, personal tragedy,
or other changed circumstances,
though not initiated by Jehovah,
may cause a person
prominent in this system of things
to reevaluate his or her life
and listen to the good news.
Such a person may realize
that high social status
does not offer a solution to life’s problems.
In the following video,
note how changing circumstances
can affect a person’s thinking.
During my high-school years,
I would work at a shipyard
as a third-class welder.
It was difficult.
In the summertime,
it was real hot on the water.
And I just said: “Wow!
“If I’m going to have to do this
for 30 or 40 years,
I’ve got to find something better.”
In that period of time, “successful” meant
“a good job, a lot of money, comfort.”
And so I went through college in four years
and got an accounting degree.
Every time I would get a transfer,
I would get promoted.
So I went from Africa to Belgium,
from Belgium to Scotland,
from Scotland back to the U.S.,
and then from the U.S. to Singapore.
And that was really a big jump
—nice cars, a driver,
putting a whole lot of money in the bank.
And every time
I would reach one of these goals,
my wife and I would sit at the table and say:
“Now—now we’re going to be happy.
Now we’re going to finally start
to be able to enjoy this.”
But it was like something fleeting.
It just wasn’t there.
The emptiness was growing bigger.
It was getting—
The hole was getting larger.
We were just perplexed.
We didn’t know where to go
to find any kind of joy or happiness.
Well, my daughter,
she had a baby shop.
It sold baby clothes
and small baby furniture.
She and her husband ran the shop.
So they hired this young girl
to help with the store
and to help with their children.
But when she wasn’t busy
with the store and with the children,
she’d pull open her Bible
and she would be reading her Bible.
So they asked this young girl,
“Do you know anybody
that could study with the two kids?”
She said, “I have the perfect people,
the perfect couple.”
And so they set up a study
the following week
on one night during the week.
And my daughter called me and said:
“Dad, can you come to this Bible study?
“I don’t know these people.
And you just need to be there
to make sure it’s on the up-and-up.”
And so I came to that first Bible study,
and I watched it.
I just sat there amazed!
But when the study was over,
I asked them, I said,
“Would y’all be interested
in studying with me?”
You know, in the world,
you may hit these goals,
but then very quickly after that,
you go way down
and then you stay way down.
The truth brings you constant joy.
There’s nothing like it.
It’s just complete satisfaction,
and you just know now
you’re doing the right thing.
And it’s just changed our whole life now
and our whole attitude.
We are just so very content and happy.
Dear brothers, we are being encouraged
to give a bold witness to prominent ones.
It’s natural that at times we may feel
intimidated by prominent ones
and hesitate to give a witness,
but let’s be determined to imitate Jesus.
In what way?
Notice what Isaiah 11:3 says about him:
“And he will find delight
in the fear of Jehovah.
“He will not judge
by what appears to his eyes,
nor reprove simply according
to what his ears hear.”
Did you notice that?
So like Jesus,
who does not judge
by what appears to his eyes,
we do not want to predetermine
a person’s response
by their outward appearance,
their large homes,
their prominence, or their position.
We also want to imitate the apostle Paul
in his attitude after he became a Christian.
Notice what he says
in the book of Romans chapter 1.
We’re going to key in to verse 16.
That’s Romans 1:16.
First, we’ll read
the first part of that verse.
It says:
“For I am not ashamed of the good news.”
Now, under inspiration, he then comments
on the effectiveness
of preaching the good news
when he says:
“It [that is, the good news]
“is, in fact, God’s power for salvation
“to everyone having faith,
to the Jew first and also to the Greek.”
So let’s be determined
to preach boldly to all,
giving Jehovah the opportunity
to stir the hearts of those who listen.
Brother Anthony Morris of the Governing Body
will now consider the final talk
of this symposium,
“Remember
—Faithless People Can Acquire Faith!
—Nonreligious People.”
I’d like you to use your imagination
for a moment.
Think back to when you were having
a conversation
with someone who you respect,
and they’re in a position of authority.
Now, during the conversation,
this person says to you
(coming up to certain points),
and they say: “Remember.
I want you to remember this.”
Well, this is what Jehovah has done for us
in this symposium.
When somebody says “remember,”
then most people stop and they refocus
and concentrate even more.
So, what does Jehovah want us to remember
with this specific part?
Well, many people who are not religious
can acquire faith.
And you think about how every year
there are people
who were atheists or agnostics
that have come into the truth.
So the lesson in this part is this:
Do not hold back
from witnessing to people
who are nonreligious.
You don’t want to take the position
as if we’re the judge of this:
‘Oh, they wouldn’t be interested
—they’re an atheist; they’re an agnostic;
they’re wrapped up with materialism.’
That’s not our position to take.
We want to be individuals
who Jehovah believes will try to help
these nonreligious individuals.
Now, notice what Paul writes here
in Romans chapter 10.
And you’ll find out
how some have changed their mind
after an exposure to the truth
and to Jehovah’s teaching.
And the only way
that they could acquire faith
is when this is done.
Now, notice carefully and pay attention,
Romans 10:13-15:
“For ‘everyone who calls
on the name of Jehovah
“will be saved.’
“However, how will they call on him
“if they have not put faith in him?
“How, in turn, will they put faith in him
“about whom they have not heard?
“How, in turn, will they hear
“without someone to preach?
“How, in turn, will they preach
“unless they have been sent out?
“Just as it is written:
“‘How beautiful are the feet
“‘of those who declare good news
of good things!’”
Isn’t that beautiful?
This is how an individual acquires faith,
by answering these questions
—very penetrating questions—
that all of us want to remember
when it comes to witnessing to people
who are nonreligious.
They need someone
to share the good news with them
but to do it in such a way
that touches their heart.
And keep that in mind.
It isn’t always just what we say;
it’s how we say it that matters.
Somebody has to share
the good news with them
if they’re going to acquire faith.
So the question arises here,
How can we share Bible truths in a way
that nonreligious people
are more likely to accept?
Good question.
So in helping nonreligious people
acquire faith,
there’s an important point
that the apostle Paul shared with us
in his first letter to the Corinthians.
So find 1 Corinthians
chapter 9, if you would, please
—1 Corinthians chapter 9.
Now notice the 22nd verse:
“To the weak I became weak,
“in order to gain the weak.
“I have become all things
to people of all sorts,
“so that I might by all possible means
save some.”
Isn’t that beautiful?
What a beautiful example the apostle Paul was
with adapting to his audience!
He’d speak one way to the Jews,
referencing the Hebrew Scriptures,
and then different to the Greeks,
who didn’t know about Jehovah God.
So the message is
to speak to them about topics
that might interest them.
And we had to share this issue with you.
The July 2019, Watchtower,
pages 22-23.
And these are some points
that you can keep in mind
when it comes to witnessing
to nonreligious people
—very, very good advice.
Notice the point here
when it comes to nature.
A lot of people, they might even be
atheists or agnostics,
love nature.
So using that as a basis
to have a conversation
is the course of wisdom.
You might say something like:
“You probably know
“that many inventions came about
“when scientists copied things
that already existed in nature.
“For instance, microphone designers
“study ears,
“and camera designers study eyes.
“What comes to your mind
when you think of nature?
“Do you think that it is a marvelous force,
a person, or something else?”
Now listen attentively
when you ask questions like that.
And then add, maybe:
“When engineers learn
from the design of ears and eyes,
“we might wonder whom they are learning from.
I was intrigued by something
an ancient poet [said].”
Now, this is wise because the poet is
the psalmist from Psalm 94:9, 10.
But you could say ancient poet.
That’s appropriate.
And here’s the quote:
“The One who made the ear, can he not hear?
“The One who formed the eye,
can he not see?
. . . He is the One who imparts knowledge
to people!”
Isn’t that beautiful?
Good questions to ask and discuss
with nonreligious people.
And then we have
the marvelous website, jw.org;
we’ve got
the “Viewpoints on the Origin of Life,”
a number of videos that can help them.
Now, at the same time, we want to have
compassion, empathy,
and try to reach their heart.
And there were some key points,
just to pass them on to you
(you want to keep in mind talking
—giving a witness to nonreligious people):
Be positive.
Keep in mind that “every year
there are nonreligious people
who [have] become Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
This is important.
Be kind and tactful,
because people will listen
‘not just because of what we say,
but how we say it.’
If you’re going to reach a heart,
speak from the heart.
So be kind and tactful,
and imitate Jesus in the way he witnessed.
Such compassion and love was always evident.
And then this point:
Be understanding and listen.
It’s so crucial to remember to listen.
Sometimes (and sincere Witnesses do it),
we talk too much.
We ask a question,
and they have two seconds to answer.
Next thing, we’re talking already,
but you have to listen.
People are not being listened to today.
Don’t let that be us.
Be understanding and listen to them.
Let them express themselves,
so that you show you have
empathy and love for them.
So keep these thoughts in mind,
and Jehovah will bless your efforts.
In fact, in the following video,
notice what has attracted nonreligious people
to the truth.
My family were nonpracticing Catholics,
so I was never taught to believe in God.
I trusted my teachers more than anyone else,
so I accepted
and loved the theory of evolution.
When I was 19, a childhood friend
who had become one
of Jehovah’s Witnesses started to call on me.
I liked talking to him, but when
he spoke to me about God, I told him,
“Please, stop talking about God
because I don’t believe in him.”
He never gave up on me.
He asked, “Why won’t you,
just for a moment,
entertain a conversation about God?”
This question made me think.
I had rejected his arguments
without even listening to them.
I didn’t want to give the impression
of being arrogant or stubborn.
So I thought, ‘Why not let him speak?’
He used the book Life—How Did It Get Here?
By Evolution or by Creation?
It was as if a veil
had been lifted from my eyes.
That was the moment Jehovah
introduced himself to me.
Finally, I understood
that my life has a purpose.
I regret that I didn’t know Jehovah
for the first 20 years of my life.
My relationship with Jehovah is without doubt
the most precious thing I have.
I am determined to witness
about Jehovah to everyone I meet,
especially to those without faith,
so that they too can appreciate
the wonderful qualities of our Creator.
Yes.
Nonreligious people are accepting the truth.
They can acquire faith,
and those beautiful experiences
prove that point.
So again we say, “Remember
—Faithless People Can Acquire Faith!”
You think back to the Ninevites,
Jesus’ fleshly brothers, and prominent Jews
—they all made great changes.
And today as in the past,
here’s what is happening
as mentioned here in 1 Timothy chapter 2
—1 Timothy chapter 2,
where it mentions in the fourth verse
about Jehovah’s will:
“. . . whose will is that all sorts of people
should be saved
and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.”
That’s Jehovah’s will.
We’ve dedicated our lives to him
to do Jehovah’s will.
So all sorts of people
are acquiring faith in Jehovah
year after year.
So we encourage you to give
a bold but tactful witness
to your unbelieving relatives
as well as to prominent ones
and to nonreligious people.
Now, as we continue to preach to all,
Jehovah will make it grow.
Jehovah will bless our efforts.
Remember, Jehovah can stir
the hearts of any person
and cause them to acquire faith.
Thank you, brothers, for the encouragement
to view people of all sorts
as potential disciples.
No doubt you were thrilled with the release
of the new Bible study aid
Enjoy Life Forever!
—An Interactive Bible Course.
How can you best use this new tool
to help others?
Please follow along closely
as Brother Robert Ciranko,
a helper to the Writing Committee,
presents the talk
“Build Faith Using Enjoy Life Forever!”
What would you say
is your greatest desire in life?
If the psalmist who wrote Psalm 146
had been asked that question,
he probably would have answered
with the words in the opening verses:
“Praise Jah!
Let my whole being praise Jehovah.
I will praise Jehovah all my life.”
Is it not also our greatest desire
to praise Jehovah forever
and to teach others
how they can worship him along with us?
Those sentiments are nicely expressed
in our original song entitled
“All I Can Give.”
Listen to a reciting of the opening words
as we watch a portion of the music video.
O heavenly Father,
I want to give all I can give.
My desire is to please you
and love you as long as I live.
I’ll help those who listen
to find in your Word what they need.
To preach and to teach
is the way I can really succeed.
As I praise you, Jehovah,
my faith’s getting stronger each day.
I’ll reflect on my dedication.
I’ll walk in your way.
Be glad that I did not try
to sing those words to you.
It is true that our faith
gets stronger each day
that we praise Jehovah.
But what of those who do not know him
or who lack faith in him?
As we study the Bible with them,
we want to help them to find in God’s Word
what they need
to worship Jehovah with strong faith.
How can we do that?
Well, faith is based on evidence.
So to have faith, a person must first acquire
an accurate knowledge of Bible truth
on which they can build their faith.
And a good place to start
is with Jesus’ words at John 17:3,
which we know very well.
In prayer to Jehovah, he said:
“This means everlasting life,
“their coming to know you, the only true God,
and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.”
Now, what is Jesus saying?
Well, that to gain everlasting life,
people need to develop
a personal relationship with Jehovah,
and that requires learning the truth
about both God and Christ.
What does that require of us
as Bible teachers?
Three things.
First, we have to clear up
any confusion in people’s minds
about the identities of God and Christ.
And two scriptures that we can use
are Jeremiah 10:10 and Matthew 16:16
—Jeremiah 10:10 and Matthew 16:16.
Jeremiah 10:10 says:
“But Jehovah is truly God.
He is the living God.”
And at Matthew 16:16, it reports:
“Simon Peter answered:
‘You are the Christ,
the Son of the living God.’”
So Jehovah is the living God,
and Jesus is the Son of the living God.
What could be clearer than that?
And yet,
simply acknowledging these basic facts
is not enough.
So then second,
we need to help Bible students
build strong faith in Jehovah.
As we learned
in the first talk of this convention,
having faith involves
coming to know Jehovah
as a real Person
—trusting in him and forming
an unbreakable friendship with him.
This involves learning
what Jehovah likes and dislikes
and knowing his values and standards.
Then the student can do what God’s Son said,
as recorded at John 14:1:
“Exercise faith in God.”
But then Jesus added:
“Exercise faith also in me.”
So third,
we want to help Bible students
build strong faith in Jesus.
What especially do they need
to believe about Jesus?
Well, we can let the apostle Paul answer,
as stated at Ephesians 1:7.
Ephesians 1:7
—he wrote:
“By means of him
we have the release by ransom
“through the blood of that one,
“yes, the forgiveness of our trespasses,
according to the riches
of his undeserved kindness.”
When a person learns that Jesus
gave his life for him personally,
then he can begin to exercise faith
in the power of the ransom
—that it is the basis
for forgiveness of one’s sins,
that it offers the hope of everlasting life
under Christ’s Kingdom,
and that it is the greatest proof
of God’s love for us.
People need to accept the whole truth
about both Jehovah God and Jesus Christ.
But still, that is not enough,
for at Romans 10:10,
the Bible says:
“With the heart one exercises faith.”
A person must not only believe the truth
but must also value it,
because only then will he be motivated
to act in harmony with the truth.
Otherwise,
he could reject convincing evidence
of the truthfulness of what he is learning
and continue to hold on
to false beliefs and wrong practices.
So we must do all we can
to reach the student’s heart
as we conduct Bible studies.
Now, does this seem
like a daunting task for you?
Well, we have been given
a wonderful new tool
with which to build heartfelt faith,
the study book
Enjoy Life Forever!
—An Interactive Bible Course.
It uses key scriptures, clear reasoning,
effective questions, beautiful artwork,
and stirring videos
to help the teacher
reach the heart of the student
and draw out what he truly believes.
If you have the book
or if you have it in your JW Library® app
on your phone or tablet,
please open it now to section 1—section 1.
And look at the lessons in that section
that progressively build faith in Jehovah.
In lesson 4, the student learns
who the only true God is
and that his name is Jehovah.
Lesson 5 builds faith
that Jehovah really is
the Author of the Bible.
Lesson 6 reveals
that Jehovah is the Creator of the universe
and the Source of all life.
Lesson 7 explains what Jehovah is like,
that he is a real person
with many appealing qualities.
And lessons 8 and 9 show how the student
can become God’s friend
and draw close to him.
Some people, however, find it difficult
to imagine being friends
with anyone they cannot see,
let alone with God himself.
Open lesson 8
—lesson 8,
“You Can Be Jehovah’s Friend,”
and in the next video, follow along
as we see how a teacher
uses what is provided in the book
to help her students build faith
in Jehovah’s desire to be her Friend.
As we look in, they are starting to consider
the information under point 6,
“What Jehovah does for his friends.”
OK, good.
Now, Point 6,
“What Jehovah does for his friends.”
Cassie, can you tap that link
“Jehovah Has Done So Much For Me”?
When I was 14,
things that happened in the past
started to catch up with me emotionally.
And I felt like everything
that happened in my life
was my fault.
Learning from the Bible that God says
that he will take my right hand,
that he will fortify me,
that he will really help me
—it blew me away!
She mentioned a Bible passage
where Jehovah takes our hand.
Can you read that at Isaiah 41:10, 13,
please?
“Do not be afraid, for I am with you.
“Do not be anxious, for I am your God.
“I will fortify you, yes, I will help you,
I will really hold on to you
with my right hand of righteousness.”
And 13: “For I, Jehovah your God,
“am grasping your right hand,
“the One saying to you, ‘Do not be afraid.
I will help you.’”
So, Cassie,
according to these verses,
what does Jehovah promise to do
for all of his friends?
Help us when we’re down or scared.
Yes!
Let’s look a little closer, though.
“I will fortify . . . ,
“I will help . . . ,
I will really hold on . . .”
—does that sound like a Friend who can help
or a Friend who wants to help?
I never thought of God, Jehovah,
like that.
Do you think that Jehovah
would make a good Friend?
Sure.
Why?
In verse 10, Jehovah
stretches out his hand to you.
Which one?
His right.
And then in verse 13,
he takes your hand.
Which one?
My right.
How?
Cassie, come here.
So is Jehovah
beside you
holding your hand?
Or is he—
In front.
That’s it
—his right hand
taking your right hand.
He’s facing you
to pull you up and out.
Cassie, what has Jehovah
pulled you out of?
Wow!
Um,
hopelessness.
That is a direct result
of friendship with Jehovah.
It grows stronger
the more we talk to him.
Let’s look at that in the next section, OK?
What a beautiful example
of using Enjoy Life Forever!
to build faith in Jehovah!
This student, Cassie,
appeared troubled and distressed,
but the sister who is teaching her
is so compassionate and patient.
And did you notice
that the sister did not talk too much?
She just effectively used
the video, scripture, and bolded questions
to draw out the student’s feelings
and helped her to visualize
what Jehovah has promised to do for her.
Our new study book
also progressively builds faith in Jesus.
Open to section 2
—section 2—
and look at the lessons in that section
that progressively build faith in Jesus.
In lesson 15,
the student learns who Jesus is
and why learning about him is so important.
Lesson 16 outlines what Jesus did on earth
and how that affects us.
Lesson 17 explains what Jesus is like
and how we can imitate his fine qualities.
Skip down to lessons 27 and 28,
which show that Jesus’ death
proves how much Jehovah and Jesus love us.
Many people, however, do not understand
the ransom sacrifice of Jesus,
or they do not view it
as God’s personal gift to them.
But the apostle Paul
believed that with all his heart.
Open lesson 27
—lesson 27, entitled
“How Can Jesus’ Death Save Us?”
And go to point 5,
“The ransom is Jehovah’s gift to you.”
Now, you’ll notice that the read scripture
is Galatians 2:20
—Galatians 2:20, which reads:
“I am nailed to the stake
along with Christ.
“It is no longer I who live,
“but it is Christ who is living
in union with me.
“Indeed, the life that I now live
in the flesh
“I live by faith in the Son of God,
who loved me
and handed himself over for me.”
Those words should come to mind
when answering
the last review question for this lesson.
So in this next video,
see how a teacher uses the Explore feature
at the end of the lesson
to reach the heart of his skeptical student.
As we look in,
they are discussing the last review question.
OK, Gene,
the last review question is,
How can Jesus’ death benefit you?
I suppose I should say
that it means forgiveness from my sins,
but God is not going to forgive me.
What makes you feel that way?
I don’t feel; I know.
I made better choices in my business
than I did at home.
Sorry.
Gene,
scroll down to where it says “Explore”
and click under
“Can Jehovah forgive even serious sins?”
OK, got it.
Can you read the second paragraph, please?
Sure.
“Some people have committed gross sins
and wonder
“whether God can forgive them.
“Happily, the Word of God says:
“‘The blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us
“from all  sin.’
“Jehovah willingly forgives even serious sins
if we have a proper, repentant attitude.”
The blood of Jesus cleanses us from all sin.
Through the ransom, Jehovah forgives our sins
—even serious ones—
and he draws us to him.
But, Ron, why should anyone get a free pass?
Because it’s not free.
Do you see the scripture link to Isaiah 1:18?
I see it.
Can you read it, please?
“‘Come, now, and let us set matters straight
between us,’ says Jehovah.
“‘Though your sins are like scarlet,
they will be made as white as snow;
“‘though they are as red as crimson cloth,
they will become like wool.’”
So forgiveness of our sins is possible
if we “set matters straight.”
What do you, Gene,
think that means?
I need to do what’s right.
I’m trying.
Yeah, that’s good.
It also involves how we feel.
We should feel sorry.
I am.
No, that’s a good sign, Gene.
Lastly,
let Jehovah help you with the step
that’s the hardest for many of us.
He can help you forgive yourself.
Jesus died for me.
Ron, I think I’m going to need
a little more time to process this.
We all do.
Let’s go ahead and conclude with a prayer,
and we’ll specifically ask Jehovah
to strengthen your faith in the ransom
and his forgiveness.
Later, when you pray,
you can beg him for the same thing.
Thank you.
OK.
Let’s say a prayer.
Jehovah, our heavenly Father . . .
Gene needed convincing
that Jesus’ sacrifice
benefited him personally.
If not convinced of that in his heart,
he would not have the faith needed
to become Jesus’ disciple.
The brother was familiar
with the contents of the Explore section
and chose to discuss with Gene
the Watchtower  article
that could best help him.
At other times, if needed,
the teacher could give the student homework
to read an article or to watch a video
from the Explore section
and get his observations
at the next study session.
In the video,
Ron was going to pray specifically
for Jehovah to strengthen Gene’s faith
in the ransom
and in God’s forgiveness of him.
What an excellent way
to keep helping a student
to draw close to Jehovah
and build faith in God’s Word!
God’s spirit produces faith
only in people whose heart
favors the truth over lies.
Let us use Enjoy Life Forever!
to teach the truth to those
with whom we study the Bible
and to help build their faith
in Jehovah and Jesus.
And let us pray for Jehovah’s help
to reach their heart.
Thank you, Brother Ciranko.
We are now even more eager
to put our new Bible study aid to good use!
Now let’s sing together song number 67,
which is entitled “Preach the Word.”
That’s song number 67.